Chapter 1

Chapter 1
LIFE IS SWEET ENOUGH
IN THIS CHAPTER
•HOW GOOD COULD YOU FEEL? •A GLOBAL EPIDEMIC
•ADDICTION •ENJOYING WHAT YOU EAT •NO HALF MEASURES
•A METHOD THAT WORKS •PLANNING YOUR ESCAPE
This book will help you to understand the truth about BAD SUGAR and take you through a proven method to cut it out of your diet completely and permanently, without leaving you feeling deprived or requiring any willpower. In fact, it will be easy. No doubt you find that hard to believe but read on. I have only good news for you.
We all have good days and bad days. On your good days, do you ever wonder whether you could feel better? Could you have more energy perhaps? Could you lose some weight? Is there a niggling ailment that you’ve learned to live with but would really love to shake off? Do you feel dissatisfied with the person you see in the mirror?
Why wait until these symptoms become severe before doing something about them? If you’re in the situation where your symptoms are already severe, don’t panic. The key to your freedom is in your hands. The fact is, almost everybody in the world could feel infinitely better in many ways by making one simple change to their diet:
SHELVE THE SUGAR!
The fact that you are reading this book shows that you have made a decision to do something about the amount of sugar you consume. Perhaps you want to lose weight and boost your level of fitness; you may be worried about developing Type 2 diabetes, heart disease or one of the other severe medical conditions that have been linked to excessive sugar consumption; or perhaps you have read about the evils of sugar and want to protect yourself or your children before it’s too late.
Most of us are hooked on sugar before we’re even old enough to be aware that we’re eating it. We grow up with no idea what it feels like to live life sugar-free. We assume that the lethargy we feel, the lows, the restlessness and the difficulty in controlling our moods and weight are just facts of life and we struggle on, continuing to stuff ourselves with sugar whenever we feel in need of a lift. The truth is very different.
SUGAR ADDICTS EAT THEMSELVES MISERABLE
You may also be aware that we need a certain amount of sugar in our diet for energy. In the next chapter I’ll explain the difference between “good sugar”, which we obtain naturally from the plants we eat, and “bad sugar”, which is refined from sugar cane and other plants, stripped of their natural goodness. Easyway also classes processed carbohydrate (such as pasta) and starchy carbs (such as potato) as “BAD SUGAR”. Most of the sugar we consume has no place in a healthy human diet. It is as unnatural as drinking petrol or injecting heroin into your veins.
When I refer to “eating sugar” throughout the book, please take this to mean eating or drinking BAD SUGAR.
Weighty facts
Obesity has become a global epidemic. According to the World Health Organization:
• 2.8 million people die each year as a result of being overweight or obese.
• In 2013, 42 million of the world’s pre-school children were found to be overweight.
• Globally, 44 per cent of diabetes, 23 per cent of ischaemic heart disease and up to 41 per cent of certain cancers are attributable to obesity.
• In 2013 there were 382 million people suffering with diabetes. By 2016 the figure had increased to 400 million. There is no doubt that the world is in the grip of a diabetes epidemic with the number of people suffering from the condition predicted to increase to almost 600 million by 2035 unless mankind changes its lifestyle and the way it eats.
• It’s not just Western society suffering. In countries such as China and India, almost 10 per cent of adults have diabetes.
• In the UK alone there are more than 3 million people living with diabetes.
The simple truth is that BAD SUGAR is the main cause of obesity and diabetes.
Dateline 2016: in the UK, studies show that an alarming number of youngsters are suffering from serious, life-changing tooth decay caused by sugar. This is in spite of free dental check-ups and treatment for children provided for decades by the National Health Service. The same “dental decay” tragedy is occurring in youngsters from Kentucky to Cancun and from Birmingham to Brisbane. It’s an indictment of education systems, parenting, and an unregulated, BAD SUGAR-pushing food industry.
WHITE DEATH
There is no secret about the ill effects of eating too much of the wrong kind of sugar. From an early age we’re told that it rots our teeth (actually it’s the bacteria that feed on it that cause the cavities), but in recent years the spotlight has fallen on a catalogue of more life-threatening conditions that have been linked to sugar consumption, most notably obesity and Type 2 diabetes.
It is hard, if not impossible, to find anybody who will stand up and say sugar is good for you. Yet from an early age we are brainwashed into regarding sugary foods as a treat. Sweets, cakes, biscuits, lollypops, ice cream, and chocolates – we are given them as rewards for being good! Only now are parents beginning to understand that, far from rewarding their children, they are passing on a potential death sentence.
For most people who grow up regarding sugar as a treat, it is only when they have become overweight or have been diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes, or most likely both, that they begin to see the truth. And even then they struggle to cut sugar out of their diet. Extraordinarily, people who range from “merely overweight” to being “clinically” or even “morbidly” obese continue to consume BAD SUGAR on a daily basis in suicidally large quantities without realizing the true nature of the harm it is causing them. Why should this be? How is it that BAD SUGAR that causes so much known harm continues to be consumed in such vast quantities that it is causing a health disaster on a global scale?
BAD SUGAR = refined sugar, processed carbohydrates, and starchy carbohydrates.
HOOKED
Have you ever said to yourself, “I’ll just have the one biscuit,” and then found you’ve eaten two or three or even the whole packet? What makes you do that? Is it sheer, unadulterated pleasure? If it is, why did you try to limit yourself to just the one in the first place? Because you were worried about the health risks? Or because you knew that if you had two it would probably lead to three and perhaps the whole packet, and then you’d suffer that guilty feeling, you’d despise yourself for your lack of self-control and you’d end up feeling miserable? All for the sake of a biscuit.
When something is a genuine pleasure, there is no need to restrict yourself in how often you enjoy it. We restrict ourselves when we sense that it might do us harm. In the case of sugar, you’d be absolutely right.
No doubt you might find it hard to accept that you don’t get any pleasure from sugar. I’ll explain more about that later. In the first instance, I’d like you to keep an open mind about that. Just consider the possibility that you don’t get pleasure from it. Don’t feel obliged to agree with that notion at this stage – merely consider it as a possibility.
So, if it isn’t pleasure, why do you go back for more?
You might be surprised by the answer:
ADDICTION
You’ve probably heard that sugar is addictive but you may have dismissed it as no more than a theory or a joke, like calling someone who can’t resist chocolate a chocaholic. No one likes to admit they’re really an addict and it seems incredible to think that just about everybody on the planet is hooked on the same substance. But that is exactly how it is. We all like to think we’re in control but if you really were in control you wouldn’t eat the second, third and certainly not the fourth biscuit. In fact, you wouldn’t eat the first either.
It’s easy to see addiction in others. The junkie who sticks a needle in his arm is clearly addicted. At our specialist clinics that treat heroin addiction it’s universally accepted by the addicts attending that they get absolutely no pleasure or benefit from it. They know they’re only taking it to get rid of the withdrawal caused by the previous fix.
That’s how addiction works. The first fix creates the craving and each subsequent fix partially relieves the withdrawal before creating another craving for the next.
Instead of curing himself by breaking the cycle, the addict seeks to get rid of his craving by taking the very thing that caused it in the first place.
It’s like trying to extinguish a fire with petrol! I have no doubt that you understand what I am saying in relation to heroin addiction.
Actually that craving – which in so many cases can appear overwhelming – is only 1 per cent physical and 99 per cent mental. The actual physical withdrawal pangs from most drugs are actually extremely mild – almost imperceptible. The real discomfort is caused by a sense of deprivation that addicts suffer and is created by the brain; it’s triggered by the slight physical withdrawal pangs but it is fed by brainwashing.
We believe that we need whatever it is we’re addicted to in order to give us some form of pleasure or a crutch. In the early days of their addiction junkies think they get that from heroin, smokers think they get it from nicotine and sugar addicts think they get it from sugar.
The brainwashing that is partially responsible for addiction is incredibly powerful. In all likelihood you’ve never taken heroin, yet you no doubt believe that there must be some kind of tremendous, incredible, fantastical pleasure delivered by the drug.
That’s partly because of the way it’s portrayed in the movies and partly because we simply can’t believe that addicts would get themselves into the position of having their bodies, their families, their careers, their very existence destroyed by a drug that actually provides no pleasure. Yet the heroin addicts that attend our clinic in London rarely need any convincing on that point.
SO HOW DOES THE ADDICTION WORK?
THE LITTLE MONSTER
Shortly after you consume BAD SUGAR for the first time, you experience sensations of withdrawal
This withdrawal creates a very mild, empty, slightly insecure, slightly uptight feeling – it’s so mild it’s almost imperceptible.
The instant you take another dose of the drug that mild, empty, insecure feeling temporarily disappears, leaving you feeling normal again. In other words, you take your second dose of BAD SUGAR merely to return to feeling how you did before the first dose.
Gradually the withdrawal feelings return, and we get that very mild, empty, slightly insecure, slightly uptight feeling again. A lifetime’s chain has started.
In other addictions this process is so subtle that the person taking the drug isn’t even aware that it’s happening.
It’s the same with BAD SUGAR – but with one key difference. With BAD SUGAR, we’ve already been through the process of getting addicted before we’re even capable of conscious thought!
SUGAR BABIES
Unlike almost every other addictive drug on this planet the people who deliver us into this addiction – the original pushers – are the people who care about us and love us most: our parents and guardians.
By the time we’re capable of conscious thought we’ve already been addicted to BAD SUGAR for years!
It’s as if it created a Little Monster inside your body that feeds on BAD SUGAR. If you don’t feed it, it complains, creating an unsettled feeling. Feed it, and the feeling disappears for a while, before returning a while later.
When you break free from BAD SUGAR addiction, you starve that Little Monster to death. It’s a weak pathetic monster, but it acts as a trigger for a bigger monster.
THE BIG MONSTER
From birth we’re not only fed BAD SUGAR by our loved ones, but also brainwashed into believing that we get some kind of benefit or crutch from it. That it is some kind of treat or reward or that it’s essential for our energy levels. The Little Monster seems to confirm this. Each time you consume BAD SUGAR and that empty, insecure, slightly uptight feeling disappears for a while, you do feel less insecure, and less uptight than a moment before. It feels like a boost. Like a heroin addict who has just had their fix.
It’s the belief that we get some kind of benefit from the drug that creates the awful cravings when we try to quit. In other words, that terrible feeling of deprivation is caused by a thought process rather than by actual physical withdrawal from the drug.
The physical withdrawal (the Little Monster) never really changes and it’s incredibly mild. It’s the thought process that it triggers along with the brainwashing (the Big Monster) that causes the unpleasant cravings.
Understanding Easyway kills the Big Monster. Starving the Little Monster of BAD SUGAR kills it quickly and ensures you never have to suffer it again.
AN ADDICTION FROM BIRTH
For most of us, addiction is a dirty word associated with potent substances and sometimes controlled by strict laws. With most addictions we can look back and identify a moment in time when the addiction took hold, usually in our late teens or early twenties. So it seems incongruous to cast BAD SUGAR – something we’ve consumed since we were babies – in the same light.
But it is not unheard of for an addiction to take hold before we are even aware we are consuming the substance. Some babies are born addicted to heroin or crack cocaine. It’s a tragic consequence of a mother who’s hooked on the drug during pregnancy.
Huge resources are pitched against the scourge of illegal drugs because the world recognizes the horrors of heroin or crack addiction. Yet BAD SUGAR is not afforded the same attention, despite the fact that obesity, heart disease and diabetes account for many million more deaths each year than heroin.
The point is, you need to forget your preconceptions about addiction and understand how it works and that it applies to BAD SUGAR.
Only when you can accept that you are addicted to sugar can you begin the process of freeing yourself. It is important to accept that you do not control your intake of BAD SUGAR, it controls you, and the only way to break that hold is to
STOP TAKING IT ALTOGETHER
ENJOY WHAT YOU EAT
A common thread in all addictions is the fear that life without what we perceive to be our little pleasure or crutch will be miserable. Talk to people about cutting sugar out of their diet and the common response will be:
“But you’ve got to enjoy eating.”
The assumption is that a diet without BAD SUGAR will be unenjoyable. This couldn’t be further from the truth. In my book Lose Weight Now , I make the following claim:
Eat as much of your favourite foods as you want, whenever you want, as often as you want, and be the exact weight you want to be, without dieting, special exercise, using willpower or feeling deprived.
To many, this seems too good to be true. By the time they finish the book, they realize that it is entirely true.
There are two key words in that claim: dieting and willpower. Most methods that promise to help you control your diet rely on willpower. As I will explain later in the book, any method that relies on willpower actually makes it harder, if not impossible, to succeed.
This method does not rely on willpower at all. Neither is it a diet. The diets that you may have tried in the past and that have failed you are temporary fixes that actually have an adverse effect. It has been found that most people who diet eventually end up putting on weight.
This method is not a temporary fix, it is a solution for life. It works by changing the way you think about the food you eat, removing the brainwashing that has been with you from birth and replacing it with the truth. Once you have changed your mindset towards food, changing the way you eat is easy. You don’t have to deprive yourself of anything. You will enjoy every meal. And you will look amazing, feel fitter and feel infinitely more energetic into the bargain.
WHY IT HAS TO BE EASY
If someone tried to fool you into believing that you could have just a little bit of heroin every now and then, would you be tempted to try it? Of course you wouldn’t, because you know that there is no such thing as just a little heroin every now and then. One dose leads to another and another and another. The tendency is always to take more.
And anyway, you know that there is no incredible pleasure in taking heroin. Don’t believe the “Tarantino-esque”, glamourized, Hollywood hype awarded to heroin that gives the impression that it provides some form of incredible pleasure. As mentioned already, the vast majority of heroin addicts who attend our clinics openly acknowledge that they take the drug merely in an attempt to feel “normal” rather than for any pleasure or high or genuine benefit. The same goes for cocaine addicts and in fact addicts of every other Class A drug that seek our help.
The same applies to sugar.
Perhaps you picked up this book hoping it would help you to reduce your BAD SUGAR intake to a healthy level. Let’s be quite clear about this: with BAD SUGAR there is no healthy level other than zero. Anything more than that is not only unhealthy, it will keep you hooked so you will end up increasing the amount you consume. The aim of this book is to help you get free of BAD SUGAR altogether.
Perhaps you still think that will require immense reserves of willpower. In fact, it takes more willpower to attempt to cut down than it does to cut it out completely. Only by reducing your intake to zero will you free yourself from the addiction. It’s remaining addicted that makes it hard.
The same is true of smoking and other drugs. Would you consider someone who cuts down from 30 a day to 10 a day to have freed themselves from cigarettes? It takes immense willpower to cut down because the tendency with all addictive drugs is always to take more. You’re constantly fighting the urge to have another fix. Eventually, the addict cracks and ends up taking even more of the drug than they were in the first place. Cutting down makes a drug seem more precious, not less. That is how addiction works. People think it is hard to quit smoking, but it’s really very easy… if you know how. It’s the people who use the willpower method who find it hard.
The “Willpower method” refers to any other method of treating drug addiction that leaves the addict believing that they are sacrificing some sort of pleasure or crutch and they therefore have to apply willpower, every day, for the rest of their lives, to fight the urge to take the drug.
The only way to free yourself from the tyranny of BAD SUGAR is to recognize that it does absolutely nothing for you whatsoever and cut it out of your diet completely. This book will enable you to do so easily, painlessly and permanently. Not only that, it will allow you to actually enjoy the process.
Let this be the first day of an exciting adventure: the day you start preparing yourself to be free. All you need to do is follow the instructions. In fact, your first instruction is:
FOLLOW ALL THE INSTRUCTIONS
You can spend a lifetime trying to break into a safe and still not succeed. But if you know the correct combination or have a key, it’s ridiculously easy. Lose the key or miss one part of the combination and you’ll fail.
This book contains the key, the combination of information you need in order to be free. It will allow you to escape.
This method is called Easyway. To find it easy we must achieve a frame of mind whereby whenever you think about BAD SUGAR or a BAD SUGAR product you have a sense of freedom and relief that you don’t consume it anymore. That’s the only way to become, and remain, truly free. Changing, or more accurately correcting, your perception of BAD SUGAR will actually be an exciting, eye-opening and positive experience. No doubt you find that hard to believe, but, read on, you have absolutely nothing to lose and everything to gain.
No doubt you might have experienced countless attempts to cut down, control or eliminate BAD SUGAR from your diet and experienced varying degrees of deprivation, misery and failure. This time, it is going to be different. Don’t expect it to be hard. I’ll explain why it isn’t going to be hard in due course.
Let’s cast aside all feelings of doom and gloom. There is no need to be miserable. You are about to achieve something marvellous. See your journey through this book as it really is, an exciting, positive process. Just think how proud you’ll feel when you’re free.
I can’t overstate the importance of keeping an open mind. Some people believe my method is a form of brainwashing. Nothing could be further from the truth. It’s actually counter-brainwashing, correcting and reversing beliefs that, from birth, you have regarded as fact. Question what you think you know about BAD SUGAR. Question what society and convention have led you to believe to be true. Question what you think you know about addiction in general. If you do that, you cannot fail.
A METHOD THAT WORKS
Whatever your reason for picking up this book, you have already established one important fact in your mind: BAD SUGAR is your enemy. In Chapter 2 , I will talk in more detail about the different types of sugar, about the “good” sugar your body needs for fuel and the “bad” sugar that causes nothing but harm. For now, let’s just focus on the aim of this book: to conquer your addiction to sugar.
This method was first conceived as a cure for smoking, a way to help people overcome nicotine addiction. I was a heavy smoker, a 60–100 a day addict who had tried and failed to quit on countless occasions. I came to believe I was genetically predisposed to being a smoker and, therefore, the only way I could quit would be through the application of tremendous willpower. It’s that misconception that prevents smokers who don’t use Easyway from quitting.
My endless failed attempts to quit had convinced me that I lacked the necessary willpower and was, therefore, condemned to suffer the misery of being a smoker for the rest of my life. But one day, a chance remark opened my eyes to the truth. I had gone to see a hypnotherapist in one last, desperate attempt to find a cure and, while the treatment did not provide the cure, a word the hypnotherapist used gave me the key. That word was “addiction”. It was like a light bulb going on in my brain: I didn’t smoke because I wanted to; I smoked because I was hooked.
I knew there and then that I was cured. I came home and proclaimed to my wife, Joyce, that I was going to cure the world of smoking, and so I set about creating Easyway. I never felt the desire to smoke another cigarette.
Easyway has helped tens of millions of people around the world to quit smoking and to gain freedom from other problems and addictions, including alcohol, gambling, debt, fear of flying and overeating. The method has gained a devoted following almost entirely on the strength of word of mouth, for one simple reason:
IT WORKS
It works not by forcing you through a painful withdrawal process or demanding huge resources of willpower. It works simply by helping you to see the truth.
Perhaps you think you already know all there is to know about the harmful effects of sugar, and yet you still consume it. Smokers also know all about the harmful effects of smoking, yet they still go to incredible lengths to feed their addiction. When I talk about the truth, I don’t mean the truth that sugar is bad for you – everybody knows that; I mean the truth that REFINED SUGAR, PROCESSED AND STARCHY CARBOHYDRATES, DO ABSOLUTELY NOTHING FOR YOU WHATSOEVER .
YOUR WAY OUT
You may be thinking, “If this method makes it so easy to cut out sugar, why don’t you just give me the key and let me get on with it?” Please be patient. You will find your escape very soon and the short time it takes to read this book will seem like a very good investment for the lifetime of freedom you will gain.
As mentioned already, the method works like the combination lock on a safe. I can give you the instructions but unless you follow all of them in the right order, the combination won’t work and the lock will remain firmly closed.
REMEMBER MY FIRST INSTRUCTION:
FOLLOW ALL THE INSTRUCTIONS
You may be tempted to skip to the end of the book to see how the method works. If you do that, the method will not work. It is essential that you read the entire book from start to finish and don’t miss anything out.
Throughout your life, you have been the victim of brainwashing that has given you a false idea about sugar and what it does for you. We need to unravel that brainwashing and replace it with the truth.
Remember, you picked up this book because you want to do something about the sugar you consume. Any method you may have tried in the past has not worked so you are hoping this method will be different. Rest assured, it is. And it works. All you have to do is follow all the instructions.
DON’T CHANGE ANYTHING YET
While you’re reading this book, there is no need to change the way you eat. The time will come when you no longer feel any need or desire for sugar, but until that time comes it’s important that you carry on consuming it as normal. So please keep consuming sugar in the way you usually do, without changing your diet in any way, until I instruct you otherwise.
SUMMARY
• Because we’re hooked on sugar from an early age, we regard it as normal. It’s anything but.
• Addiction and brainwashing are what makes us continue to consume sugar, despite knowing all the harm it causes us.
• With addiction we try to relieve our craving by taking the very thing that caused it.
• Cutting down is pointless. It’s also incredibly hard.
• Quitting the easy way means quitting completely – the great news is that it is EASY.
• It does not require willpower.
• Follow all the instructions.
