CHAPTER 7

CHAPTER 7
HOW WE LOST SIGHT OF NATURE’S GUIDE
IN THIS CHAPTER
•ACQUIRED TASTE •WHY WE JUMP THE WARNING LIGHTS
•KNOWING WHO TO TRUST •THE FIFTH INSTRUCTION
•MAKING PROGRESS
While our interest in second-rate foods was born out of necessity, our dependence upon them is something we have the power to change.
Have you ever wondered why a child can get sick at a birthday party? All those fries, pizza, cake, all those biscuits and sweets, all those sugary drinks – they overdo it in their excitement and they just can’t keep it down. But have you ever thought about the physical effect that causes them to be sick?
There are two points to observe here:
1. Children do not naturally self-regulate when faced with an abundance of sugary food;
2. They sometimes don’t just feel a bit poorly after eating it; they actually bring the food back up.
The first point is evidence that refined sugar does nothing for you at all. It provides no satisfaction because it contains none of the nutrients your body needs. So a child will keep eating until they are over-full because the gauge that tells them they have satisfied their hunger records no nutritional intake. I will look more closely at hunger later.
The second point is evidence of another ingenious function of the incredible machine. When the body detects poison, it does everything it can to expel it from your system. If you’ve ever experienced vomiting to the point where you feel there is nothing left to come up, you will know just how vigorous your body can be in clearing out poison. It’s unpleasant and upsetting, but it’s a life-saver.
So why aren’t we always sick whenever we eat BAD SUGAR? Here again is another marvel of the incredible machine. While it is finely attuned to the food we eat, your body is also very resilient, far more so than your car. Put diesel in a petrol engine and you’ll be lucky if it ever works again. At the very least, you will have a very expensive repair on your hands. But when you eat the wrong foods, your body does its best to absorb the impact, even to the extent of developing an immunity to the poison.
This is one of the amazing attributes of the human body, but it should not be taken for granted. Your body’s capacity to roll with the punches is not infinite and while there may be no physical signs of damage on the outside, we already know that the damage on the inside can be severe. The body’s resilience, coupled with brainwashing from the food industry, has led us to believe we can get away with eating just about anything, to the point that we don’t really even question the intake of these foods any more. But the statistics on obesity, diabetes, heart disease and other ailments prove the opposite is true.
ACQUIRING AND UNACQUIRING TASTE
Your body’s ability to adapt to foods that it wasn’t designed to eat is also part of our survival story. While Nature’s Guide ensured that we were drawn to the foods that were best for us by making them taste the best, it would have been a short-lived plan if there had been no contingency for when these foods were not available. The contingency was to give us the ability to acquire a taste for second- and third-rate foods, so that we could continue to eat and avoid starvation when our favourite foods were scarce.
Our ancestors also knew the importance of storing food for times of shortage and, being the most intelligent species on the planet, they developed the most ingenious methods for doing so. But they will have quickly discovered the drawback with food that gets left uneaten: it goes off. In fact, it gets eaten by other creatures, namely bacteria.
Bacteria are just as much a part of Nature’s Guide as we are. They just happen to like the same foods as we do. So our ancestors had to find a way to preserve their food against decay, and over time they came up with a range of methods, such as cooking, smoking, salting, freezing, pickling, bottling, canning and refining. In every case they were effectively making the food inedible to bacteria. But in so doing they were also taking out most of the properties that made it food in the first place – the nutrients.
How sugar preserves
Sugar is a very effective preservative. It works by drawing water out of the food or tying it up in the food so that it is not available to bacteria. It also drives the water out of the bacteria themselves, preventing them from growing.
Preserving food in this way was a necessary adaptation for our ancestors, a way of ensuring survival when the supply of favourite foods dried up. It was used to sustain sailors on long voyages, but they suffered as a consequence, with diseases such as rickets and scurvy, due to the lack of nutrients. Fresh fruit was a godsend on sea voyages.
There was no confusion then as to which were the right foods to eat, but as the Industrial Revolution drew people out of the country and into the towns, it became increasingly difficult to provide enough fresh food for everybody and so the demand for processed food exploded. The provision of processed foods became big business and once that happened, we were all at the mercy of commerce.
Today, we are utterly dependent on supermarkets. They sell us frozen foods, which we take home and put in our freezers, or dried goods, which we store in our cupboards for months, even years. We are told that these foods are of genuine nutritional benefit. We are even led to believe that we need them to survive. Who are we to question it? After all, we’ve been sold the same line from infancy, even by our own parents.
Love kills
There is a terrific responsibility on parents to safeguard their children’s health through the food they feed them. Sadly, parents take their guidance from unreliable sources. As a result, children are routinely encouraged to try foods that trigger a warning light, and in some cases punished if they don’t. They are similarly encouraged to finish everything on their plate, regardless of how hungry they are. Most parents regard it as their duty to instil these habits in their children, believing that they will help them to enjoy a more varied and interesting diet in adult life, and to be strong and healthy.
Children who refuse to eat so-called grown-up foods are labelled as fussy, but all they are doing is responding to Nature’s Guide. If they were allowed to eat only what appeals to their instincts, they would avoid getting hooked on many of the processed foods that we then try to cut out later in life when weight problems and eating disorders catch up with us.
The fact is that by the time the child is capable of independent thought, they are already addicted to junk and therefore often fooled into making bad food decisions. Even so, with young enough children, put a bowl of fresh fruit next to a bowl of sweets and it’s normally the fresh fruit that disappears first.
Parents who read this book have a marvellous opportunity not only to solve their own eating problems, but also to ensure that their children do not suffer in later life. Question the brainwashing that you were brought up with and instead apply the common-sense guide that Nature has provided to your children.
Nature did not intend for us to carry on eating inferior foods when our favourite foods became available again, yet this is exactly what we have done. We have conditioned ourselves to regard foods that are bad for us as favourites.
Taste is a personal thing. Ask a room full of people what they think of paté. Some will say it tastes revolting; others will say it tastes divine.
How can the same food provoke such polarized responses? Because taste is acquired by each one of us individually and it differs according to the way we’ve been conditioned.
As any Italian will tell you, nothing beats the taste of Mama’s cooking. You don’t have to be Italian to go along with that. Those favourite dishes that our mothers (or fathers) made for us when we were growing up are seldom matched by anyone else’s recipes later in life. Why do you think that is?
The reason some foods, such as chocolate, are more universally popular than others, such as paté, is purely because more of us have been conditioned to like chocolate than have been conditioned to like paté. The only foods that taste good to everybody are those we are drawn to by Nature’s Guide.
The belief that sugary foods taste good is an illusion brought about by conditioning. If you believe it’s an inherent quality in the food, why does your own personal taste alter during the course of your life?
As children, we devour jelly and ice cream with a passion. At parties it is the special treat that is kept until last, after we’ve eaten the sandwiches, fries and pizza. By the time it is served our anticipation is at fever pitch and if someone promised us a lifetime’s supply of the stuff we would jump at it.
Yet offer an 18-year-old jelly and ice cream and they’ll think you’re being funny. By that age, the idea of it being a special treat has long since worn off and there is no desire for it whatsoever. You’ve moved on to more grown-up poisons, like alcohol or coffee or more sophisticated desserts. If a child tastes alcohol, they’ll recoil in disgust. Yet by the time we’re 18, we have usually got over that reaction.
Acquiring a taste for any food means overriding a warning light. The gag reflex a child displays when they taste alcohol is purely instinctive.
Your senses detect poison and trigger a physical response to reject it. But your body is adaptable and if you persist with the same poison, it will try to override the warning light.
There is a theory that if you sample any food 14 times, you will acquire a taste for it. What you are actually doing is acquiring a loss of taste. The body builds an immunity, suppressing the senses that trigger the reflex to reject it. Through forcing your body to adapt, you destroy part of its ability to protect you.
Why would intelligent man do such a thing to himself? Because the instinctive messages we receive from our senses have been confused by the misinformation we’ve received from all those outside influences who tell us they know best. We are told that drinking alcohol is a grown-up thing to do and at 18 there is nothing we want more than to be thought of as grown-up. We persevere through the revulsion, the nausea and the hangovers until we find we can drink without feeling sick.
Similarly, eating a wide variety of foods is regarded as grownup. Children can be picky, but in an adult it’s not a trait that’s admired. So we force ourselves to “acquire a taste” for all sorts of things that as children we find repugnant: oysters, blue cheese, beer and alcohol, coffee, etc.
Without the brainwashing we could and would live very happily without these items. We would also consume a lot less BAD SUGAR. Why? Because sugar is the food industry’s way of making second-and third-rate foods seem palatable.
Remember, refined sugar is designed to replicate the sweetness of our favourite foods. Nature gave us the ability to adapt to second-rate foods when our favourites were scarce; it didn’t intend us to go on eating them when our favourite food became available again. Yet that is what we’ve done. Thanks to refined sugar, we have come to regard eating junk as natural.
FIFTH INSTRUCTION: FREE YOURSELF FROM SLAVERY TO YOUR PRESENT TASTES AND EATING HABITS
You might think that if the brainwashing has been going on for so many years, it will take a mighty effort to get free. And if we have become so incapable of recognizing Nature’s Guide, how will you ever be able to identify the foods that really do taste the best?
The good news is that, just as your body has the incredible power to adapt, its resilience also makes it a fast healer. Your natural instinct is still very much intact and you can quickly restore its power over the brainwashing just by following the instructions in this book.
If you try to solve your sugar addiction without undoing the brainwashing, by relying on willpower, it will take a mighty effort and you will most probably fail. The beauty of this method is that it is easy. All you have to do is follow the instructions.
Just as you can learn to “enjoy” the taste of any food by eating it regularly enough, you can learn to dislike them again too and rediscover the pleasure in eating the foods that are good for you.
WHO’S BRAINWASHING WHOM?
Taste can be acquired and unacquired very quickly. Whatever we decide we want to eat, we can adapt accordingly in a short space of time. So it all comes down to how you decide what you want to eat.
This raises a very important question and it’s one you may be wanting to ask. Up until now you’ve been following the instructions and keeping an open mind to everything you’ve read. But keeping an open mind means questioning both sides of the argument. Until you complete the book and are convinced that everything I’ve told you is true, I want you to accept the possibility that it could be true, but I don’t want you to accept it blindly. Question both sides of the argument. That is the only way to come to the truth.
How can you be sure that it’s not Easyway that’s doing the brainwashing? Perhaps the basis of this method is to brainwash you into believing that the foods you’ve regarded as your favourites until now actually taste bad, and that the foods that are best for you also taste the best?
Well, if that were the case, would it not be preferable to the alternative? If this book could brainwash you into liking only foods that were good for you, it would achieve its aim of putting the joy back into eating. But that is not how the method works and to prove it, here’s another illusion.
Look closely. What do you think this says?
Now hold the book a little further away. What do you see? Some people see the word “Good” first and then “Evil” later. Others see it the other way round. It doesn’t matter. The point is that once you see the full picture, you can never be fooled by half of it.
The brainwashing of the food industry has offered you only one point of view: it has convinced you that BAD SUGAR gives you some sort of pleasure or crutch. You know it’s making you miserable but you are convinced that there must be something good about it to make you keep coming back for more. But what if there wasn’t? Think back to the heroin addict. What if the only thing that kept you coming back for more was addiction?
The aim of this method is to show you that there is an alternative view: that sugar does absolutely nothing for you whatsoever. It doesn’t do this through brainwashing; it does it by stripping away the misinformation that has blinded you to the truth. It’s actually COUNTER-BRAINWASHING! Once you can see through the illusion, you can never be taken in by it again.
A TALL TALE
This method enables you to see through the illusions by presenting you with undeniable facts. For example, we are told that we need to eat meat to get protein to make us big and strong, and dairy for calcium to give us healthy teeth and bones. We grow up believing this to be true.
We are one of many land mammals occupying the planet, all of different shapes and sizes, some of which eat meat, some of which don’t. The largest of all land mammals is the elephant. It must consume some protein and calcium to grow to that size and sport such magnificent tusks, right? But the elephant doesn’t eat meat, nor does it eat dairy.
The fact is we can get all the protein, calcium and other nutrients we need from our favourite foods as designed by Nature’s Guide, without eating meat or dairy. When presented with facts like this, you start to question everything else you’ve ever been told about nutrition.
Now don’t panic! I’m not about to suggest that you become vegetarian and avoid dairy products – although if you did so, you’d probably become infinitely healthier. Our objective is to free you from your addiction to BAD SUGAR, but I just want you to think about Nature’s Guide for a while.
Think about strong, muscular, powerful, fast animals: lions, tigers, jaguars, cheetahs, bulls, wolves, bears, rhinos and so on. They all have one thing in common; they don’t drink milk beyond infancy and they don’t eat BAD SUGAR.
How do you think these supreme beasts would look and behave if they were fed bowls of pasta, rice, or fed plates of pizza, or troughs of fried or roast potatotes, sweets and chocolate? Do you think it would make them strong? Or do you think it would make them slow, sick and susceptible to illness?
You might think that the idea of feeding those incredible animals those foods is ridiculous, but how much more ridiculous is it to have bombarded your strong healthy body with those foods for your entire life? How much more ridiculous is it to have nurtured and raised your children to consider those foods precious and desirable? Don’t beat yourself up about this – you took a wrong turn, that’s all. When you realize you’ve walked into a blind canyon, the only sensible thing to do is turn around and walk your way back out.
Our real favourite foods are a matter of fact. Their taste is not acquired, it is enjoyable from the very first time we try them and they never stop tasting good. But the culmination of addiction since infancy, years of misinformation and powerful suggestion from food advertisers, has rendered our instinct for our real favourite foods ineffective. We no longer follow Nature’s Guide because our heads are full of a confusing mass of mixed messages.
MAKING REAL PROGRESS
We are conditioned to regard any transition from old to new as progress, but the way our eating habits have changed over the past few hundred years is not progress, it is a backwards step. Only now that the world is waking up to the damage caused by BAD SUGAR are we beginning to open our minds to this fact. For centuries, we have accepted the word of the food industry and taken its processed products as part of the advancement of our species. Now we know different. It’s time to revert to Nature’s Guide – that will be real progress. When you started reading this book, you probably found it hard to believe that you could eat as much of your favourite foods as you wanted, when you wanted and be free from BAD SUGAR. Just like the Good/Evil illusion, you should now be able to see that this is possible. In fact, it isn’t just possible, it’s natural. It’s exactly what 99.9 per cent of the animal kingdom do all the time.
If you are still unsure, please go back and read this chapter again. It is important to remove preconceptions about what your favourite foods are and open your mind to the possibility that pretty much everything you have believed until now is a myth. This realization should fill you with joy. It is the beginning of the unravelling of the brainwashing that has kept you trapped.
Remember the aim of this book is to help you enjoy and feel happy about the food you eat. It is not to make you feel deprived. You are not giving up anything, only making marvellous gains. You have everything to look forward to and nothing to fear. Keep following the instructions and your escape will be easy.
SUMMARY
• Your body is designed to reject poison, but it will build a tolerance when required.
• We develop a taste for second-rate foods as Nature’s way of ensuring we survive when our favourite foods are scarce.
• An acquired taste is actually an acquired loss of taste. We can “unacquire” a taste just as easily.
• Social conditioning forces us to acquire a taste for poisons.
• Free yourself from slavery to your present tastes and eating habits.
• When you see the full picture you can never be fooled by half of it.
• You are not giving up anything.
