Chapter 9

Chapter 9
FEAR
IN THIS CHAPTER
•THE ALLURE OF BADNESS •A TUG-OF-WAR
•FEAR OF FAILURE •FEAR OF SUCCESS
•ALL YOU HAVE TO GAIN
All addicts are pulled apart by fears, all of them entirely illusory.
When you look at the facts about BAD SUGAR and its effect on the human body, when you take into account the massive rise in obesity and diabetes over the time that refined sugar and processed and starchy carbs have become such a ubiquitous part of our diet and when you consider that it neither tastes of much, nor gives us anything in the way of nutrition, you would think it would be easy to cut it out of your diet and think nothing more about it.
Well, guess what:
IT IS EASY!
The reason you, like millions of others, have not found it easy up until now is because you have been brainwashed into thinking that BAD SUGAR gives you some sort of pleasure or crutch.
Several years ago, there was an advertising campaign for cream cakes, which had the slogan “Naughty, but nice”. It was a fiendishly clever piece of advertising, using an argument for NOT eating cream cakes to convince us to do the exact opposite. We all like the idea of being naughty. We associate naughtiness with fun, character, excitement. In the case of a cream cake, “naughty” means one thing and one thing alone:
THIS CAKE IS BAD FOR YOU
But aren’t we so often drawn to things we know are bad for us because they seem to make life more interesting? People, pastimes, food and drink? This was exactly the mindset that the advertising campaign was exploiting. We all want to lead interesting lives. We fear drudgery. So we’ll eat a cream cake, if it means we’re being more exciting.
Would it have been more honest if the advertisers had used a stronger word than “naughty”? Certainly it would. Something that gives you diabetes is more than naughty, it’s downright evil. Would it have put us off eating cream cakes, if they’d used the slogan “Evil but nice”? Probably not, because the same brainwashed thinking would still have applied. Smokers read the message “Smoking Kills” on every packet of cigarettes, but it doesn’t stop them. If anything, it reinforces their belief that the cigarette must be giving them pleasure or a crutch. “If I know it’s killing me, but I still want it so much, there must be something good about it.”
Despite our knowledge of the disastrous effect BAD SUGAR can have on our health, we still make excuses for consuming it. Why? Because just as we fear the harmful effect it has on us, we also fear life without it.
We’ve explained about the tug-of-war that all addicts live with and the contradictory statements they come out with. “It makes me so miserable, but it’s my one pleasure in life.” On the one side of the tug-of-war is the fear of all the damage that BAD SUGAR is doing to our health; on the other side is fear caused by all the brainwashing: how could I cope without it? I’ll be miserable! I’ll never stay free!
Fear is a response that comes from both our instinct and our intellect. It is the instinct that drives us to fight or flight, alerting us to danger and making us wary in potentially dangerous situations. As such it is vital to our survival. But the things that make us afraid can be both real and imaginary. Our intellect has enabled us to learn about potential dangers and how to avoid them, so much so that we can be fearful of dangers of which there is no present evidence.
For example, the fears associated with losing your job are intellectual. You have learned about the possible consequences of finding yourself unemployed – e.g. having no money, being forced to sell your possessions, sacrificing the pleasures and comforts that you enjoy now, and so you do everything in your power to safeguard your job and make yourself indispensible, even when there is no threat of losing your job.
In this instance your intellect does you a good service. But what if your projected fears are based on false information? Say you read in a magazine that fruit causes cancer. You would probably avoid eating fruit. You would also worry about the damage already done by all the fruit you’ve eaten in your life.
No one, to my knowledge, has yet claimed that fruit causes cancer, but it is typical of the sort of scare stories with which we are bombarded on a regular basis. Some of them are based on sound evidence; others are nonsense. As consumers, it’s impossible for us to know what to believe and we end up spending precious time worrying about things that will never happen – and, in the same confusion, being blasé about things that will.
FEAR IS THE BASIS OF ALL ADDICTION
It is the force that makes it seem difficult to quit when all logic tells us it should be easy. Fear is the ingenious con trick that keeps us in the trap. It is ingenious because it works back to front. It’s when you are not consuming BAD SUGAR that you suffer the empty, insecure feeling. When you consume it, you feel a small boost, which partially relieves the insecurity and your brain is fooled into believing that the sugary food is providing a pleasure or crutch. In fact, it is BAD SUGAR that created the fear. The more you consume, the more it drags you down and the more apparent your need for the crutch.
This is why you, like all addicts, can never win while you’re in the trap. When you’re consuming BAD SUGAR, you wish you didn’t have to. It’s only when you can’t have it that it appears to be precious. You mope for something that doesn’t exist, an illusion: the perception of a pleasure or crutch.
FEAR OF FAILURE
Being addicted to BAD SUGAR is like being in a prison. Every aspect of your life is controlled by sugar: your daily routine, your hopes, your view of the world, your suffering. Of course, you’re not physically imprisoned; there are no walls or bars. The prison is in your mind. However, as long as you remain a slave to BAD SUGAR, you will experience the same psychological symptoms as a convict in a physical prison.
If you’ve tried and failed to come off BAD SUGAR – or any other addiction – you will know that it leaves you feeling more firmly trapped than you did before. It’s like a scene from a film in which a prisoner is thrown into a cell and the first thing he does is run to the door and wrench at the handle. This confirms his predicament: he really is locked in.
Trying and failing to conquer an addiction has the same effect on the addict. It reinforces the belief that you are trapped in a prison from which there is no escape. This can be a crushing experience and many people conclude that the best way to avoid the misery of failure is to avoid trying in the first place. The twisted thinking of the addict concludes that as long as you never try to escape, you will always preserve the belief that escape is possible. It is only when you try to escape that it becomes impossible.
You can clearly see how self-defeating this thinking is, yet there are millions of intelligent people around the world who continue to delude themselves in this way. They prefer to continue suffering the misery of addiction than risk the misery of failure. What they don’t realize is that the person who tugs at the prison door and finds it firmly locked is using the wrong method of escape.
When channelled properly, the fear of failure can be a positive force. It’s the response that focuses the mind of the runner on the starting blocks, the actress waiting in the wings and the student going into an exam. Fear of failure is the little voice in your head that reminds you to prepare thoroughly, to remember everything you’ve rehearsed and trained for, and to leave nothing to chance.
In the case of addiction, the fear of failure is illogical. It is the fear of something that has already happened. You are already a slave. You suffer a compulsion to keep stuffing yourself with BAD SUGAR, even though it’s ruining your life and making you miserable. As long as that continues, you will always feel a failure.
The addict’s fear of failure is based on the illusion that trying and failing will make you even more miserable than you are now. In reality, you have nothing to lose, even if you do fail. By not trying, you ensure that you remain permanently in the trap. In other words:
IF YOU SUCCUMB TO THE FEAR OF FAILURE, YOU ARE GUARANTEED TO SUFFER THE VERY THING YOU FEAR
But failure isn’t the only fear that keeps addicts imprisoned in the trap.
FEAR OF SUCCESS
There is a syndrome among long-term convicts that drives many of them to reoffend soon after they are released from prison. It’s a depressing phenomenon, which occurs not because they are compulsive criminals who haven’t learned the error of their ways, but because they actually want to go back inside. Life on the outside is alien and frightening for them; prison offers them a sense of security. It’s the devil they know.
The same fear afflicts addicts. They regard life without their “crutch” as a prisoner regards life on the outside: they’re afraid that they won’t be able to enjoy or cope with life, that they’ll have to go through some terrible trauma to get free and that they’ll be condemned to a life of sacrifice and deprivation.
Perhaps you’ve been tricked into believing that life without BAD SUGAR is boring. You’re well aware of the misery that your sugar addiction causes you, but you may have come to regard it as part of your identity.
The hopeless chocaholic who just can’t help herself. Perhaps you think it gives you personality or makes you loveable. If your friends love you for your BAD SUGAR addiction, it’s for one reason and one reason only:
IT MAKES THEM FEEL BETTER ABOUT THEIRS
All addicts love another addict; that’s why they tend to group together. It’s not because they find one another more interesting; it’s because they find each other less threatening. You don’t feel quite so stupid about your addiction when you’re in the company of another addict.
Is that how you want to be loved? As the fool who makes everyone else feel better by comparison? Or would you rather be loved and admired for your health and happy disposition?
HOW TO WIN THE TUG-OF-WAR
Remember what you’ve learned about the way addiction works: the panic feeling that makes you afraid to even try to cut BAD SUGAR out of your diet is caused by BAD SUGAR, not relieved by it. Once you quit, you will never suffer it again. The tug-of-war of fear may appear to you like a permanent struggle, but actually it is easy to win, because the fears pulling you from both sides are caused by the same thing: BAD SUGAR.
TAKE AWAY THE BAD SUGAR
AND THE FEAR GOES TOO
This method does not rely on tricks or gimmicks. It works through simple logic, replacing myths and illusions with the truth. But if there was one thing that would help the process, it would be a time machine. Then we could transport you into the future to the time when you finish reading this book and know just how good it feels to be free. Fear will have been replaced by elation, despair by optimism, self-doubt by confidence, apathy by dynamism. As a result of these psychological turnarounds, your physical health will improve too. You will enjoy a newfound energy, as well as the ability to truly relax.
Some people try to come off BAD SUGAR using other methods and manage to go for weeks or months without it, but still report that they miss it. This method is different. There is no sacrifice involved. You are not about to give up anything. You will not miss BAD SUGAR food. All you are doing is removing something from your life that has made you miserable and replacing it with something that makes you genuinely happy.
So get it clear in your mind:
THERE IS NOTHING TO FEAR
You are exchanging a lack of control over what you eat for total control – no choice for freedom of choice.
Part of you feels that BAD SUGAR is your friend, your companion and support, something you can always fall back on when you need a pick-me-up. This is an illusion. This sort of food is not food at all; it’s your worst enemy. Far from supporting you, it’s driving you deeper and deeper into misery. You instinctively know this, so open your mind and follow your instincts.
DITCH THE DOUBTS
Think about everything you stand to gain by getting rid of BAD SUGAR. Try to imagine the self-respect you’ll feel, the time and energy you’ll save not having to make excuses and pretend that you’re in control. That little short-term illusory boost you feel every time you eat a cake or biscuit or chocolate bar or pizza or bowlful of pasta is how you’ll feel all the time when you’re free. The irony with all addictions is that the addict is constantly trying to feel like a non-addict feels all the time. The only way to do that is to quit being an addict.
In fact, how long do those illusory boosts even last? Not even as long as it takes to eat the junk. Before you’ve even finished eating it you start to feel guilty, remorseful, bloated, ashamed and out of shape. Imagine being free from those awful feelings forever. Imagine finishing every meal feeling FABULOUS, fit, healthy and happy.
If you had to witness a heroin addict suffering the misery of drug addiction, would you advise them to keep injecting heroin into their veins, rather than try living without that “high” they feel every time they get a fix? Of course you wouldn’t. You would see that the “high” is nothing more than relief from the terrible craving that is caused by the drug as it leaves the body. It would be obvious to you that the only way to stop that craving would be to stop taking the drug.
Perhaps you don’t think your problem is as severe as that of a heroin addict. That’s because, in spite of Hollywood’s attempts to brainwash us to the contrary, pretty much everything you’ve ever heard about heroin is negative, whereas you’ve been brainwashed into believing that BAD SUGAR can be a positive. The truth is that both do absolutely nothing for you whatsoever, both destroy your health, destroy your self-esteem, enslave you and make you miserable.
All addicts are caught in the same trap. See yourself as you would see a heroin addict and give yourself the only logical piece of advice:
CUT OUT THE BAD SUGAR NOW!
It’s as simple as that. The only reason you might fail to see the solution as simple is because you’ve been brainwashed into the tug-of-war of fear. Once you can see that there is nothing to fear, that you are not giving up anything or depriving yourself in any way, quitting is easy.
In his own words – Jack, a “BAD SUGAR” addict who got free using Allen Carr’s Easyway:
All my life I’ve been overweight. From my very first memory it seemed that I was out of shape. I loved playing soccer, but often couldn’t keep up with play because of the extra weight I was carrying.
When I look back at photos of myself in childhood, I actually wasn’t hugely overweight, just enough to stand out as being a bit chubby. The same applied all the way through adolescence and young adulthood. Definitely overweight, but not terribly so.
My favourite foods were always pizza, sandwiches, pasta and potatoes of every description (fried, roasted or mashed, not forgetting crisps). I never used to eat a lot of sweet stuff, but my diet was made up almost entirely of processed or starchy carbohydrate. Don’t get me wrong – I could eat my way through a whole pack of biscuits and as many chocolate bars or as much ice cream as might be put in front of me and there were certainly times when I would binge on that kind of food.
As I reached my thirties and moved into my forties, it became apparent that I was gaining more and more weight, to the point where I was deeply embarrassed and ashamed of how I looked. It was strange how quickly I moved on from the moment of realization, the feeling of self-loathing and self-disgust, to just accepting that this was just the way I was. I tried my best never to be photographed. Ever! I felt embarrassed for my kids because I could imagine what their school friends might think of them having such an overweight father. I look at photographs that were taken of me in my forties; there are only a few, and it makes me want to weep for the man pictured. I feel a strange kind of detachment from him. I feel immense sympathy for him, regret for him, but overwhelmingly I feel incalculable relief that I escaped from being him.
How did I do it? I realized that I was addicted to BAD SUGAR. Within 14 months of avoiding it, I had lost more than 70 pounds. To my astonishment, and to the astonishment of my wife, my kids, my family and my friends, it wasn’t even difficult. In fact it was ridiculously easy and enjoyable.
I couldn’t ever imagine living without eating fries or pasta or potatoes or rice or noodles or bread, but within days of cutting them out of my diet, I simply didn’t want them anymore. I think my brain understood that they were poison to me and from that moment my instinct took over.
I recall as if it were yesterday, the day that my life changed forever. I’d had a routine health check with my doctor and she delivered the bad news to me: “Sorry, you have Type 2 diabetes and need to start medication immediately.” It was like a punch in the face. She talked about the future prospect and danger of potential organ failure, amputation, eyesight failure. Stuff that, I’m ashamed to admit, I’d never known could be affected by weight gain ultimately leading to Type 2 diabetes. I hadn’t even known that being so overweight made me almost certain to become a Type 2 diabetic.
I was given a handful of leaflets describing what my diet should be and what kind of medication I would need to take. I walked out of the doctor’s office reeling from the news.
But very quickly something stirred in me. I remembered a newspaper article I’d read the previous year that described how a Type 2 diabetes sufferer had moved to the USA through his job and when he went to his first consultation with his US doctor and described the eating programme he followed under the advice of his English doctor, his US physician described it as “suicidal”. I have no idea why I remembered the newspaper story, I think it resonated with me because it talked about how the guy with diabetes was eating processed and starchy carbohydrate with every meal and it was this that the US doctor found so unbelievable. I think it stood out for me because deep down I suspected that my problems with weight were caused by an addiction to what I understand now to be BAD SUGAR.
My doctor had told me that my HbA1c fasting blood test results were extremely high. She’d even done a retest to double-check. The HbA1c test indicates your blood glucose levels for the previous two to three months. It does this by measuring the amount of glucose that is being carried by the red blood cells in the body. The result was categoric. I was Type 2 diabetic and faced a lifetime of medication and ongoing tests to protect my health.
Somewhere, it just didn’t sit right with me. I don’t know why or how, but I knew deep inside that it just wasn’t right.
From that moment onwards, I eradicated some simple foods from my diet. No potato in any form. No rice. No bread (other than a thin slice of wholemeal toast in the morning with my breakfast). No pasta. No refined sugar (such as desserts, sweets or pastries). No fruit juice.
I’d stopped smoking with Allen Carr’s Easyway and it was so easy to apply the same mindset to this issue.
I focused on eating plenty of fresh, healthy food, fruit, vegetables, salads – always making sure that if I ate meat it was in reasonably small portions with plenty of salad. I didn’t eliminate dairy entirely, I just made sure that I didn’t have milk and only had a little cheese every now and then (aside from a small amount of feta crumbled into my salad).
I was never hungry and enjoyed what I was eating. For the first month or two, I even avoided alcohol. I just wanted to see if I could get better.
Just TWO DAYS after I started my new way of eating, I purchased a blood glucose monitor, a simple device to test blood sugar levels. The first reading I got was in the normal range. Normal! The second reading I got was normal. Over the coming days, every reading I took was absolutely normal. I was thrilled. I was hopeful. More importantly, I felt amazing. Within a couple of weeks the weight began to fall off me. Only a pound or two most weeks, but it was steady and it was easy.
I made an appointment to see my doctor again. I explained that I had taken my own blood sugar readings and that they indicated I was normal. She was dismissive and almost aggressive and was determined that I begin taking diabetic medication. She dismissed my daily blood sugar readings saying that the test that really mattered was the HbA1c and that given that test covers two to three months she’d test me again in just under three months’ time. I carried on testing myself and continued to get only normal results. Even when I began to allow myself a beer or two on a Friday night, the results remained well within the normal range.
By the time I went back for the next HbA1c test, I’d already lost 20 pounds and lost three inches off my waist. I’d had to buy new trousers and jeans.
The doctor was surprised by the results of the HbA1c test. They were normal. Yet she still encouraged me to start taking medication and made an appointment for me to see a nutritionist. By the time I had the appointment with the nutritionist, I had lost more than 40 pounds and had moved up another three holes on my belt (my waist having reduced by more than five inches) and was feeling fabulous and still having normal blood readings every single time I checked. The nutritionist bizarrely described the way I was eating as “inadvisable” and suggested that I start each day with a glass of orange juice (the effect of which is like a sugar bomb) and that I should eat starchy carbs (a third of a plate) with every meal. I couldn’t believe it; the nutritionist, who was young enough to be newly qualified, actually recommended that I eat the very foods that had nearly killed me! I told her about my weight loss and showed her the old holes on my belt, explaining that I was making regular trips to the local cobbler to have him punch extra holes in my belt. She was unmoved and maintained that her advice was good. I ignored it, thank goodness, and continued to lose weight and inches around my waist. I saw amazing changes; even my feet looked in better shape – basically, less chubby. A year later, I returned for another check-up, 70 pounds lighter and more than nine inches slimmer around the waist. By now I was on first name terms with my cobbler. I’d only get one extra hole punched in my belt at a time – it was so enjoyable knowing that before too long I’d be back for another.
More than four years has passed since my diagnosis. Never once have I had a bad blood sugar reading either with the device I use at home, or with the HbA1c test.
Fairly soon after I had started eating better, I became more inclined to exercise. I started taking the train to work rather than driving. The 15-minute walk to the station was fabulous, and not sitting in traffic every morning and evening was amazing for my stress levels. The commute made sure that I at least moved my body a little. I had been shocked when I thought about my sedentary lifestyle, I’d only been walking a few yards to my car on my drive and a few yards from my work parking space to my desk, that was it! I was never really into going to the gym and didn’t feel that I wanted to dedicate time to that kind of thing, but being a rail user meant that instead of sitting in my car for 45 minutes each morning and evening, I was getting a 15-minute walk. I started listening to music, audio books, and radio podcasts while I walked and after a few months realized that if I walked 30 minutes to a railway station on a different line, it would only add five minutes to my commute and boost my walking by 100 per cent. I went for it and enjoyed every single step, every single day, through spring, summer, autumn and winter. The fact is it was changing my eating that created the weight loss. The exercise was a wonderful bonus and incredibly healthy change in lifestyle.
Over the past few years, I’ve noticed that the mainstream medical profession has started looking into low-carb diets to handle Type 2 diabetes, but there still seems to be an automatic assumption that upon diagnosis someone with the disease needs to be medicated (and keep on having a third of a plate of starchy carbs with every meal). I was amazed to find out that several diabetes charities were funded in a significant way by pharmaceutical companies that manufacture the medication for the disease and food companies that produce and sell BAD SUGAR foods. Even today, the diabetes charities in the UK remain “sniffy” about sufferers freeing themselves from the disease by changing their diet. The fact that they refer to “recommended intake of carbohydrates”, rather than differentiating between good sugar and BAD SUGAR, indicates a complete lack of competence (at best) or outside influences (at worst).
I do owe my life to my doctor – if she hadn’t tested me for Type 2 who knows whether I would ever have become free. I also owe my life to the writer of the article I read the year before my diagnosis. I’ve spent hours trying to track the article down on the internet, but never succeeded. Aside from that, and most of all, I owe my life to Allen Carr’s Easyway. Stopping smoking easily changed my life forever, and applying the same principles to BAD SUGAR made the whole process of losing weight and becoming healthier not just easy, but incredibly enjoyable, effortless and, more importantly, long-lasting.
FEAR OF THE PROCESS
There is one further fear that might be preventing you from winning the tug-of-war. You may be afraid that the process itself will be painful. If you’ve struggled to cut out sugar before by using willpower, you may remember it as a torturous experience. That’s because the willpower method doesn’t work. As I will explain in the next chapter, it actually makes quitting harder.
So forget your past attempts to quit. See that your failures were down to using the wrong method. The fact that you’ve found it impossible to quit up until now has no bearing on the fact that you want to quit. That has never gone away.
EIGHTH INSTRUCTION: NEVER DOUBT YOUR DECISION TO QUIT
Your desire to conquer your sugar addiction is the reason you’re reading this book. Keep that in mind as you read on, think about everything we’ve established so far and be clear that you understand and accept it. If you are struggling with any of the instructions, go back and re-read the relevant chapter until it becomes clear. It is essential that you not only follow the instructions, but also that you understand and accept them.
If you follow all the instructions, you will no longer feel the desire for BAD SUGAR. The desire to quit will win out and the prison door will spring open.
SUMMARY
• Addicts are constantly pulled in two directions by the tug-of-war of fear.
• Succumb to the fear of failure and you guarantee failure.
• The fear of success is based on illusions.
• Cut out BAD SUGAR and all the fears go too.
• Open your mind to everything you stand to gain.
• There is no physical or mental trauma in quitting.
• Never doubt your decision to quit. There is nothing to fear.
SUGAR MYTHS – THE BIG SEVEN
(These are the myths we tell ourselves about sugar)
“It’s a social thing.”
Are you saying if you’re home alone and there’s fudge cake in the fridge, it goes untouched? The fact is that, when you binge with someone else, it feels like you at least have a partner in crime. It makes you feel less awful about yourself. Yet somewhere along the line the guilt and the self-disgust still haunt you.
“It gives me a burst of energy and it’s my way of relaxing and chilling out.”
Can you see the ridiculous contradiction in those two claims? As a sugar addict you’re incapable of relaxing without feeding that Little Monster. That’s not the same as sugar helping you to relax. It’s like wearing tight shoes just for the relief of taking them off.
One of the saddest things about the modern-day sugar trap – and for that matter the caffeine trap – is that perfectly healthy, vivacious, athletic, and energetic kids are being conned into believing they have to drink caffeine-loaded “sugar bombs” to take part in sports or simple leisure pursuits. As they get older, they’re even conned into drinking the same kind of caffeine and sugar bombs with their first experiences of drinking alcohol.
Even as an adult, your natural state should be to feel energized anyway. If you’re not sick, you should have more than enough energy to enjoy whatever you want to do in life. If you really are tired, then your body is asking for sleep and rest, not BAD SUGAR.
Using BAD SUGAR for energy is like taking out a payday loan. A quick injection of cash (energy) and they’ve got you hooked in, with interest, for the rest of your life, with you having to go back for more again and again and again until you do something about it. The reality is that sugar addiction makes you permanently tired and exhausted. Take a look at anyone with a sugar problem. They invariably look tired, run-down and ready to drop. The irony is that the only thing that’s stopping them returning to their energetic, athletic, vivacious former self is the one thing they think they need to function – BAD SUGAR.
For the few occasions in life when we need a little help to get through a late shift or to keep us going until the end of a long day there are many natural, harmless, non-addictive, and healthy stimulants to help temporarily carry us through. The fact is, if you get BAD SUGAR out of your life, you won’t feel in need of them anyway. You’ll be brimming with energy.
“I love the smell.”
That’s fine but I love the smell of any number of perfumes and aftershaves yet I have no desire or need to drink them!
“It’s my comfort food.”
This is the biggest fraud of all. When a BAD SUGAR addict is happy, what do they do? They eat sugar. When a BAD SUGAR addict is sad what do they do? They eat sugar. As an addict they’re incapable of doing anything without a constant supply of the drug to which they are addicted. And the biggest fraud about “comfort” eating? It makes you feel lousy about yourself: guilty, ashamed and disgusted. There’s nothing comforting about it. All you’re doing is feeding the Little Monster.
“It’s my treat or reward.”
You don’t choose to consume BAD SUGAR. If you had any choice whether to do so or not, you wouldn’t be reading this book. As a BAD SUGAR addict you’re incapable of doing anything without having BAD SUGAR before, during and after. It’s not a reward or treat system; it’s simply drug addiction.
“I love the taste.”
Yet you’d eat an entire box of chocolates, even the ones you don’t really like. Be honest: there are times you wolf the stuff down so quickly you can’t even pretend to be savouring the taste. Does that sound like it has anything to do with liking the taste, or does that just sound like you’re feeding the Little Monster? If it was anything to do with taste, why do you swallow it? Why not just spit it out?
Why haven’t Mars made sugar-free M&Ms? For the same reason tobacco companies don’t sell nicotine-free cigarettes: neither of these addictions are about taste; they’re just about getting your fix.
“Chocolate is better than sex!”
If you really believe that, you don’t just need to quit sugar, you need to find a new partner… and fast!
