CHAPTER 15

CHAPTER 15
REVERSE THE BRAINWASHING
IN THIS CHAPTER
•BE SELFISH FOR ONCE •A TWO-PRONGED ATTACK
•DEPRIVATION •A NEW STATE OF MIND
•THE ELEVENTH INSTRUCTION
The time has come to start reversing the effects of all that brainwashing and see good and bad foods as they really are.
The food industry is like a runaway train that has gone down the wrong track. It is so huge and has gathered so much momentum that nobody has the power to stop it. So you might be wondering how it can possibly be easy to reverse the brainwashing in the face of such an irresistible force. The answer is simple: DO IT FOR YOURSELF.
It’s not your responsibility to bring the food industry to a halt. That is not our aim. The purpose of this book is to cure your addiction to BAD SUGAR and make you happy about the way you eat. Put everyone else to one side. This is your happiness we’re talking about and you are the one person that matters. All the other sugar addicts can take care of themselves. After all, this book is available around the world.
See your task as a direct showdown between you and your addiction. Wouldn’t you back yourself every time? All you have to consider is your own position and realize that you have been brainwashed. Once you have accepted that fact, you are well on your way. The next step is to make your mind up to do something about it. The third step is to actually do it.
You have come a long way since you started reading this book. It’s safe to assume that you have opened your mind and understood all you have read. The fact that you haven’t thrown the book across the room and resigned yourself to a life of unhappy eating proves that you want to see this through. That is crucial. Understanding the logic behind Easyway is no good if it doesn’t compel you to take action.
A TWO-PRONGED ATTACK
It’s surprisingly simple to reverse the brainwashing. All it requires is for you to keep an open mind and do two things.
The first is to take the time to concentrate on the foods that were designed for you by nature and start seeing them as the wonderful and beneficial packages that they are. Cut open a ripe, juicy, colourful peach, orange, pineapple or pear; breathe in the amazing aroma; feel your mouth watering at the prospect of that delicious flavour; look at the cool, fresh juice; and appreciate the energy and nutrients that your body is going to gain from it, with barely any effort and a minimum of waste.
Try some fruits that you haven’t tried before. Explore the wide variety that’s readily available in the shops. Exotic fruits like mango, kiwi, passion fruit and pomegranate, or different types of berries. Each one has its own distinct look, smell, feel and flavour, and each one is packed with nutritional goodness and taste.
While you’re exploring, try the vast array of fresh, delicious, nutrient-packed, high-water-content vegetables. You can take your pick from carrots, cabbage, lettuce, radish, cauliflower, tomato, pepper, avocado, mushroom, broccoli, spinach and many, many more. They all taste fabulous raw and you can mix them to create delicious, nourishing dishes.
Just by exploring the variety of fresh fruit and vegetables available, your choice of dishes will expand. If you feared that cutting out BAD SUGAR would limit your options when it came to meal times, you can now put that fear to one side.
Your second action point is to take the time to see the foods that you have always believed to be your favourites for what they really are. It doesn’t take much imagination to realize how you have been brainwashed into seeing junk food as something special. Analyse the advertisements and ask yourself exactly what they’re telling you. Notice the way they skirt around the subject, avoiding the truth by wrapping it in clever wordplay and a concoction of distracting imagery.
The fact is that processed food, which includes anything cooked, tastes bland to us unless it is flavoured with fruit or another of our primary foods. Don’t just take our word for it; put it to the test. Try some rice or pasta without any fat, seasoning, or sauce, or a slice of bread without butter, jam or any other filling or topping. Peel and boil a potato. Eat it without any butter or seasoning or sauce. Be completely straight with yourself: how does it actually taste? And how does it compare to that cool, succulent fruit?
NOTHING TO LOSE
By now you should be in full agreement that there is a stark contrast between the genuine enjoyment of eating fruit and the perceived enjoyment of eating BAD SUGAR. It’s easy to put it to the test and most people have no difficulty accepting it when they do, yet some people reach this stage and still fear that they are going to feel deprived when they quit.
While they acknowledge that nothing tastes as good as fresh fruit and vegetables, they still fear that they will be missing out in some way if they “give up” BAD SUGAR. Smokers who try to quit using the willpower method experience a similar fear. They worry that they will never be able to concentrate or enjoy a social occasion ever again once they no longer have cigarettes. This is because they haven’t understood the nicotine trap. They still believe they are making a sacrifice.
People with eating problems make the same false connections for the same reason. Perhaps you associate cake, biscuits, ice cream and desserts with get-togethers with friends. You may believe that those occasions won’t be the same without those “treats”. Or you like to buy a chocolate bar on your journey home from work and you fear that the journey will become even more of a drag without the chocolate bar.
Perhaps you see processed and starchy carbs as an important, inexpensive, and hunger satisfying part of your diet? You might be wondering how you might feel “full up” without them. Yet has it occurred to you that the pursuit of feeling “full”, especially using foods that have no nutritional value, is pointless as well as being a clear symptom of your addiction?
Maybe you’re worried about denying your family these “foods”. But would you really wish to feed them food which you now understand to be junk, poisonous and addictive? If a beautiful wild animal – a lion, or chimpanzee, or an antelope – was left in your care would you really ignore its favourite foods according to Nature’s Guide and choose to make pasta, potato or rice the main ingredient in its diet?
Why can we see it so clearly in that scenario yet we struggle to apply it to ourselves? Can you see how thoroughly we’ve been brainwashed into ignoring Nature’s Guide?
The fact that we’ve survived putting the junk into our bodies for so long is testimony to the power and robustness of the human body. Our bodies have worked hard, day after day, year after year, to deal with the junk that we’ve subjected them to.
How many potatoes do you consume in a week? How much pasta? How much bread? Imagine all those items in your mind. A whole week’s worth. Then imagine a whole year’s worth of each food item. Strip away the fats and the sauces and the seasoning and imagine tasking your body to process those unnatural, unhealthy, damaging and addictive foods rather than nutritious, healthy, natural fruit and vegetables. Think of it in terms of simply the physical weight, bulk and stodge of those refined sugar, processed and starchy carb “foods”. No wonder that eventually our bodies begin to show the strain. In the end we become incapable of handling the poison and that’s when our bodies begin to show the signs of the damage we’ve done.
When you replace all that stodge and poison with delicious, easily digestible fruits and vegetables, it will feel like a huge weight has been lifted from your mind as well as your body.
When we look at the global epidemic of obesity and Type 2 diabetes, even in the poorest countries in the world, and see that these figures coincide with “peak BAD SUGAR consumption”, isn’t it obvious what has happened?
THE TIDE IS TURNING
People are beginning to set themselves free. Many thousands of people have discovered Type 2 diabetes can be reversed by losing weight and cutting out BAD SUGAR. It’s dawning on millions of people that the food companies have got fat on our addiction to BAD SUGAR and that the pharmaceutical industry has got fat prescribing us a lifetime’s medication to treat a disease that could be cured by changing our diet and eating our way back to health. IT’S EXTRAORDINARY THAT THE TWO INDUSTRIES HAVE CONSPIRED: ONE FEEDING US POISON THAT MAKES US ILL, THE OTHER FEEDING US “MEDICINE” THAT ENABLES US TO KEEP EATING THE POISON .
It’s only recently that large parts of the medical profession are beginning to see the truth, and mainstream attitudes to Type 2 diabetes and diet are beginning to change.
IT’S NOT ABOUT THE SUGAR
Some people go to extraordinary lengths to bake cakes and biscuits for gatherings with friends and they pin the success of the occasion on the quality of their baking. Usually, if any social occasion is a happy one it’s not because of the food, it’s because of the company. Some people mistake the food as the source of happiness because they associate it with the happy occasion.
Take away the people, or replace them with people you don’t like, and would the occasion be as happy just because there’s cake and biscuits? More likely it would be doubly miserable. Take away the cake and biscuits but keep your favourite people and the occasion will still be a happy one. The fact that you partially relieve your craving for BAD SUGAR on these occasions makes you think it’s the BAD SUGAR that has made you happy. It’s important that you recognize the difference between genuine and false pleasure.
A false pleasure diminishes the more you come to depend on the stimulant and fools you into thinking you are getting some benefit when, in fact, you are doing yourself untold harm. A genuine pleasure has no downside. It gives sustained happiness and physical benefits. If you can choose between genuine pleasure and false pleasure, doesn’t it make sense to pick the one that does you lasting good?
The chocolate bar on your journey home from work is an illusory crutch. You find the journey boring; you get restless and fidgety. The chocolate bar appears to relax you. The act of eating it gives you something to think about for part of the journey and it feels like a pleasure. But what happens if your journey is longer than it takes to eat a chocolate bar? You either drag the bar out, leaving gaps between each mouthful so that it lasts the journey, or you eat it in one go and spend the rest of the journey wishing you had another one.
You’ve probably seen people on the train or bus, trying to make their confectionery last. You may well have done it yourself. You take a bite, swallow it and quickly want the next bite, but you know you’ve got a long way to go so you hold yourself back. You deny yourself your next fix for several minutes. During this time you can’t concentrate on anything else. All you can think about is that next mouthful of chocolate. When you finally allow yourself to have it the relief is so great that you devour the chocolate without pausing to taste it.
It’s only a matter of time before you start buying more chocolate to last the whole journey, so you can avoid having to spend any of the time feeling deprived.
What you need to realize is that the restless feeling that you associate with your journey home is not helped by the chocolate bar; it’s caused by it. Free yourself from your addiction to BAD SUGAR and you will approach the journey home in a much more relaxed state of mind. You’ll find it a great deal easier to concentrate on other things, such as reading a book or newspaper, or even catching up with your work if you have to, and the journey will become an enjoyable and satisfying daily routine.
If you are hungry during your commute, there is an endless selection of readily available, easy-to-carry, easy-to-eat fruit at your disposal.
There is so much more to freedom from BAD SUGAR addiction than avoiding chocolate bars or puddings or cakes. Once you are free from BAD SUGAR, living without it is actually the most natural, easiest way of living you could imagine. Life becomes so much easier and more enjoyable.
All the so-called pleasures that you associate with BAD SUGAR are put in your mind by brainwashing and addiction. When you free yourself from the tyranny of the Big Monster and destroy the Little Monster, you will be amazed how much more enjoyable life becomes. You will feel more relaxed, more energetic, more at ease with yourself and healthier. In other words, YOU HAVE NOTHING TO LOSE AND EVERYTHING TO GAIN.
A NEW STATE OF MIND
From a very early age, before you were even old enough to understand, you have been brainwashed into believing that you love BAD SUGAR foods like cakes, biscuits, sweets, pasta, potato products and rice, but you have come to see that they don’t love you. We’re all aware of the harmful effects of BAD SUGAR even from a relatively early age. We associate it with being fat and having bad teeth. There is no illusion that BAD SUGAR is not harmful; now you need to go one step further and accept that BAD SUGAR provides absolutely no benefit whatsoever.
When you can see that, you will find the desire for sugary foods quickly goes and quitting becomes easy. Any thoughts you had that you would have to stop a runaway train are replaced with the joy of realizing you are free.
Opening your mind requires no more effort than merely recognizing that the brainwashing exists, accepting that you have been a victim of it and making a conscious decision to start seeing things as they really are. From now on, you will find yourself analysing everything you eat, especially processed food, and questioning whether you really want to put it in your body. You’ll be surprised how natural this feels but it’s logical that it should feel natural: you are getting back in touch with Nature’s Guide.
EAT AS MUCH OF YOUR FAVOURITE FOODS AS YOU WANT, WHENEVER YOU WANT, AS OFTEN AS YOU WANT, AND BE THE EXACT WEIGHT YOU WANT TO BE, WITHOUT DIETING, SPECIAL EXERCISE, USING WILLPOWER OR FEELING DEPRIVED
When you first read this claim you probably thought it sounded too good to be true. If it worked, surely everyone would be doing it. The fact is millions of people around the world have followed this method and found that it works. The only reason not everybody is doing it is because they haven’t found it yet, or they’ve been misled into following the willpower method by someone they regard as an expert.
But you have kept reading because you can see the logic and the truth in the method and you want to see it through. The next step is to make the commitment to do something about it. The next instruction is the most exciting of all:
ELEVENTH INSTRUCTION: GO FOR IT!
SUMMARY
• You’re not trying to change the food industry, just your own susceptibility to it.
• To reverse the brainwashing, first accept that you have been brainwashed.
• Take the time to see good and bad foods as they really are.
• You have nothing to lose and everything to gain.
• Go for it!
